# Riak Mesos Framework Tutorial

This is a guide for the installation and usage of the Riak Mesos Framework (RMF).

## Requirements

Before getting started with the RMF, there are a few environment and system related requirements that are assumed for the remainder of this tutorial:

* A Mesos cluster version 0.24.0 or above.
    * It is possible to use versions earlier than 0.24.0, but not recommended because persistent volumes are required to keep Riak data around in failure states such as Mesos agent crashes or task failures.
    * There are no specific requirements on number of masters, agents, or public agents.
    * General recommendation is to have at least as many Mesos agents as planned Riak nodes because Riak performs best when running on unique physical machines.
* Python version 2.7 or above.
    * Administration scripts are written in Python. It is also possible to hit the RMF's HTTP API endpoints directly, but instructions are not included in this document.
* Operating system is one of: Ubuntu 14.04+, CentOS 7.0+, CoreOS or other modern Linux.
    * The CoreOS build of the framework utilizes chroot and an embedded Debian (Ubuntu 14.04) image to run the included Erlang applications and should work in most modern Linux environments, but using one of the natively built versions of RMF is preferred for simplicity and stability.
* Mesos-DNS installed and running.
    * While not actually a requirement, all configuration in this guide will use endpoints automatically generated by Mesos-DNS such as `leader.mesos` and `marathon.mesos`.
    * Information on Mesos DNS installation and configuration can be found here: [http://mesosphere.github.io/mesos-dns/](http://mesosphere.github.io/mesos-dns/).
* Ability to run the python CLI tool from an environment that has access to the Mesos master, Zookeeper, and Marathon.

## Installation

### Download and Install the CLI Tool

The Python based CLI tool has been uploaded to [http://riak-tools.s3.amazonaws.com/riak-mesos/riak_mesos_cli_0.3.0.tar.gz](http://riak-tools.s3.amazonaws.com/riak-mesos/riak_mesos_cli_0.3.0.tar.gz). It should contain the following files:

* `config.json`: Sample configuration file with the default values.
* `riak-mesos`: The executable Python CLI tool.
* `zktool_darwin_amd64`: Binary dependency used to perform Zookeeper calls. Used when run from Mac OSX environments.
* `zktool_linux_amd64`: Binary dependency used to perform Zookeeper calls. Used when run from Linux environments.

```
mkdir -p $HOME/bin
cd $HOME/bin && curl -O http://riak-tools.s3.amazonaws.com/riak-mesos/riak_mesos_cli_0.3.0.tar.gz
tar xvzf riak_mesos_cli_0.3.0.tar.gz
export PATH=$HOME/bin/riak_mesos_cli:$PATH
```

### Print Usage

Try executing `riak-mesos`, `riak-mesos -h`, or `riak-mesos --help` to output the usage instructions.

We'll be covering the majority of the commands in this guide. Here is a brief description of some of them:

* `riak-mesos config`: Output the current configuration values.
* `riak-mesos framework`: Interact with the RMF application.
    * `config`: Output the generated Marathon json application definition for the RMF.
    * `install`: Install the RMF as a Marathon app.
    * `uninstall`: Delete the RMF from Marathon and delete related Zoookeeper entries.
        * ***Note:*** This will not kill Riak node tasks, so make sure to run `riak-mesos cluster destroy` first.
* `riak-mesos cluster`
    * `create`: Creates a named Riak cluster (default is `default`) in the RMF using default values for `riak.conf` and `advanced.config`.
    * `list`: Lists the names of each cluster.
    * `config`: Outputs the configuration values for `riak.conf` and `advanced.config`.
    * `restart`: Performs a rolling restart of the cluster. If you've upgraded to a new version of the RMF or Riak, restarting the cluster will push the new Riak version while preserving the data directories if you are using persistent volumes.
    * `destroy`: Kills all Riak node tasks for a cluster, deletes any created persistent volumes, and un-reserves any dynamically reserved resources for the nodes.
* `riak-mesos node`: Interact with an individual node in the cluster.
    * `info`: Outputs information about a Riak node stored by the RMF.
    * `aae-status`: Outputs the active anti entropy status for a node.
    * `status`: Outputs the member status information for a node.
    * `ringready`: Outputs the ringready status for a node.
    * `transfers`: Outputs the active and waiting partition transfers for a node.
    * `bucket-type`: Interact with bucket types on a node / cluster.
        * `create`: Creates and activates a bucket type given some properties as json.
        * `list`: List all bucket types and their properties from a node / cluster.
    * `list`: List all nodes in a cluster.
    * `remove`: Kills the task for a node, destroys any created persistent volumes, and un-reserves any dynamically reserved resources.
    * `add`: Adds one or more nodes to a cluster.
* `riak-mesos proxy`: Interact with the RMF smart proxy.
    * `config`: Output the generated Marathon json application definition for the RMF smart proxy.
    * `install`: Install the RMF smart proxy as a marathon app.
    * `uninstall`: Delete the RMF smart proxy from Marathon.
    * `endpoints`: List the endpoints and descriptions provided by the RMF smart proxy.

### Create a Configuration File

If your environment differs from the required the default parameters, you may need to create a custom configuration file. Export the default config using this command:

```
riak-mesos config --json | python -m json.tool > config.json
```

The resulting `config.json` can then be modified to fit your environment. Here is a brief description of some of those values:

* `riak.url`: Location of the RMF tar ball which contains the actual RMF executables.
    * Use `"http://riak-tools.s3.amazonaws.com/riak-mesos/ubuntu/riak_mesos_linux_amd64_0.3.0.tar.gz"` for Ubuntu environments.
    * Use `"http://riak-tools.s3.amazonaws.com/riak-mesos/centos/riak_mesos_linux_amd64_0.3.0.tar.gz"` for CentOS environments.
    * Use `"http://riak-tools.s3.amazonaws.com/riak-mesos/coreos/riak_mesos_linux_amd64_0.3.0.tar.gz"` (Default) for CoreOS / Other Linux environments.
* `riak.master`: The address for the Mesos master. Example values:
    * `localhost:5050`
    * `leader.mesos:5050`
    * `zk://leader.mesos:2181/mesos`
* `riak.zk`: The address for Zookeeper. Default value is: `leader.mesos:2181`.
* `riak.cpus`: Amount of CPU resources for the Framework task. Default value is: `0.5`.
* `riak.mem`: Amount of Memory for the Framework task. Default value is: `2048`.
* `riak.node.cpus`: Amount of CPU resources per Riak node. Default value is: `1.0`.
* `riak.node.disk`: Amount of Memory resources per Riak node. Default value is: `8000`.
    * ***Note:*** To ensure that each Riak node resides on a unique Mesos agent / physical host, this value should be at least 51% of a single Mesos agent's total capacity.
* `riak.node.mem`: Amount of Disk resources per Riak node. Default value is: `20000`.
* `riak.role`: Mesos role for the RMF and tasks. Required for Dynamic Reservations / Persistent Volumes.
    * ***Note:*** The Mesos master may need to be restarted with `MESOS_ROLES=riak` or `--roles=riak`.
* `riak.auth-principal`: The Mesos authentication principal. Required for Dynamic Reservations / Persistent Volumes.
* `riak.flags`: Any additional flags to pass to the RMF. Default value is: `"-use_reservations"`. Remove this parameter when running Mesos version 0.23 or lower.
* `director.url`: Location for the RMF smart proxy. The smart proxy will automatically detect changes in the Riak cluster topology based on updates to Zookeeper values stored by each of the running Riak nodes.
* `marathon.url`: Address for Marathon. Default value is: `"http://leader.mesos:8080"`.

***Note:*** If you did change any of the default configuration values, any future `riak-mesos` commands must include the `--config /path/to/your/config.json` argument, although the examples in the rest of this document will not include them.

### Install the RMF

Since I'll be running the RMF on a Mesos cluster with Ubuntu 14.04, I'm going to replace `coreos` with `ubuntu` in my `config.json` like so:

```
sed -i.bak 's/coreos/ubuntu/g' config.json
```

Run the following command to create a Marathon application with the id `riak`:

```
riak-mesos framework install
```

You can check the status of the Marathon app deployment by navigating to [http://leader.mesos:8080](http://leader.mesos:8080) directly, or with this snippet:

```
curl --silent http://leader.mesos:8080/v2/apps/riak | python -m json.tool | grep alive
```

## Create a cluster

Let's start with a 3 node cluster. Execute the following to get started:

```
riak-mesos cluster create
riak-mesos node add --nodes 3
```

After a few moments, we can check the status of our nodes:

```
riak-mesos node list --json | python -m json.tool | grep CurrentState
```

A status of `3` means that the nodes are in the `Started` state, so a healthy cluster would look like this:

```
"CurrentState": 3,
"CurrentState": 3,
"CurrentState": 3,
```

## Inspecting Nodes

Now that the cluster is running, let's perform some checks on individual nodes.

```
riak-mesos node status --node riak-default-1 | python -m json.tool
```

The output of that command should yield results similar to the following if everything went well:

```
...
    "nodes": [
        {
            "id": "riak-default-1@ip-172-31-51-148.ec2.internal",
            "pending_percentage": null,
            "ring_percentage": 34.375,
            "status": "valid"
        },
        {
            "id": "riak-default-2@ip-172-31-51-148.ec2.internal",
            "pending_percentage": null,
            "ring_percentage": 32.8125,
            "status": "valid"
        },
        {
            "id": "riak-default-3@ip-172-31-51-148.ec2.internal",
            "pending_percentage": null,
            "ring_percentage": 32.8125,
            "status": "valid"
        }
    ],
    "valid": 3
...
```

Other useful information can be found by executing these commands:

```
riak-mesos node aae-status --node riak-default-1
riak-mesos node ringready --node riak-default-1
riak-mesos node transfers --node riak-default-1
```

## Update the Cluster Configuration

You can customize the `riak.conf` and `advanced.config` for a cluster if necessary. Use [scheduler/data/riak.conf](https://github.com/basho-labs/riak-mesos/blob/master/scheduler/data/riak.conf) and [scheduler/data/advanced.config](https://github.com/basho-labs/riak-mesos/blob/master/scheduler/data/advanced.config) as templates to make your changes to. It is important that all of the values specified with `{{...}}` remain intact.

Once you have created your customized versions of these files, you can save them to the cluster using the following commands:

### Update riak.conf

```
riak-mesos cluster config --file /path/to/your/riak.conf
```

### Update advanced.config

```
riak-mesos cluster config advanced --file /path/to/your/advanced.config
```

***Note:*** If you already have nodes running in a cluster, you'll need to perform a `riak-mesos cluster restart` to force the cluster to pick up the new changes.

## Restart the Cluster

If your Riak cluster is in a stable state (no active transfers, ringready is true), there are certain situations where you might want to perform a rolling restart on your cluster. Execute the following to restart your cluster:

```
riak-mesos cluster restart
```

Situations where a cluster restart is required include:

* Changes to `riak.conf`
* Changes to `advanced.config`
* Upgrading to a new version of RMF / Riak

## Install the Proxy

There are a few ways to access the Riak nodes in your cluster, including hosting your own HAProxy and keeping the config updated to include the host names and ports for all of the nodes. This approach can be problematic because the HAProxy config would need to be updated every time there is a change to one of the nodes in the cluster resulting from restarts, task failures, etc.

To account for this difficulty, we've created a smart proxy called `riak mesos director`. The director should keep tabs on the current state of the cluster including all of the hostnames and ports, and it also provides a load balancer / proxy to spread load across all of the nodes.

To install the proxy, simply run:

```
riak-mesos proxy install
```

## Add Some Data

Assuming that the proxy is now running, we can now find an endpoint to talk to Riak with this command:

```
riak-mesos proxy endpoints
```

The output should look similar to this:

```
Load Balanced Riak Cluster (HTTP)
    http://SOME_AGENT_HOSTNAME:31026
Load Balanced Riak Cluster (Protobuf)
    http://SOME_AGENT_HOSTNAME:31027
Riak Mesos Director API (HTTP)
    http://SOME_AGENT_HOSTNAME:31028
```

Let's write a few keys to the cluster using the proxy:

```
RIAK_HTTP=http://SOME_AGENT_HOSTNAME:31026
curl -XPUT $RIAK_HTTP/buckets/test/keys/one -d "this is data"
curl -XPUT $RIAK_HTTP/buckets/test/keys/two -d "this is data too"
```

## Scale the Cluster Up and Down

### Scale up

When scaling a cluster up, you should attempt to do so days or even weeks before the additional load is expected to allow the cluster some time to transfer partitions around and stabilize. When you are ready to increase the node count, you can just run the `node add` command like so:

```
riak-mesos node add
```

Check the status of the node and make sure it was successfully joined to the cluster using:

```
riak-mesos node status --node riak-default-4
```

### Scale down

Scaling down requires the same patience as scaling up in that you should be waiting for transfers to complete between each node removal.

Let's remove all but one of the nodes by performing a remove on `riak-default-2`, `riak-default-3`, and `riak-default-4`

```
riak-mesos node remove --node riak-default-2
riak-mesos node remove --node riak-default-3
riak-mesos node remove --node riak-default-4
```

## Verify the Data

Now that the cluster has undergone some changes, lets verify the data that was written previously with:

```
curl $RIAK_HTTP/buckets/test/keys/one
curl $RIAK_HTTP/buckets/test/keys/two
```

## Uninstall the RMF

When you're all done with a cluster and need to uninstall the framework, follow these steps:

### Destroy the Cluster

```
riak-mesos cluster destroy
```

### Uninstall the Proxy

```
riak-mesos proxy uninstall
```

### Uninstall the framework

```
riak-mesos framework uninstall
```

The last step `riak-mesos framework uninstall` can be run multiple times to ensure that all of the Zookeeper data is removed after the riak scheduler is killed.
